Formalizing Medieval Astrological Reception: A Computational Framework Based on Bonatti, Abu Ma’shar, and LillyI. Introduction: The Computational Architecture of Astrological LawThe endeavor to translate the qualitative, often aphoristic traditions of medieval and Renaissance astrology into a deterministic software engine requires a fundamental shift in ontological perspective. To the medieval astrologer, a horoscope was not merely a map of celestial energies but a juridical field—a complex web of legal standing, jurisdictional rights, and diplomatic protocols between planetary agents. When formalizing these rules for computation, we are essentially building a state machine that governs resource allocation. The planets act as agents with specific inventories of "dignity" (resources/authority), and "Reception" is the mechanism by which these resources are shared, traded, or withheld.In the engineering of such a system, the primary challenge lies in the variance of the source code—the texts themselves. The transition from the Arabic-era rigors of Abu Ma’shar (9th century) and the Latin synthesis of Guido Bonatti (13th century) to the Early Modern English practice of William Lilly (17th century) represents a gradual "lossy compression" of technique. Rules that were strictly conditional in Bonatti often became implicit or generalized in Lilly. A robust software model must therefore not conflate these eras but operationalize them as distinct logic profiles or "modes."This report establishes a comprehensive, source-cited ruleset for "Reception" and "Mutual Reception." It navigates the textual discrepancies to provide a "Strict Mode" (based on Bonatti and the Dorothean tradition) and a "Standard Mode" (based on Lilly and the Ptolemaic revival). The analysis prioritizes the construction of logic gates that determine when a reception is valid—distinguishing between the mere potential of reception (standing in a sign) and the operative reception (aspectual contact)—and how these states numerically or categorically modify the outcome of a chart, particularly regarding the mitigation of debility.The central thesis of this formalization is that Reception is a functional operator in the chart's logic. It is an IF/THEN gate that overrides default conditions. A planet in Fall is structurally failing; a planet in Fall with Reception has been granted a specific exception to succeed. The software model must track not just the static position of planets (the state), but the vector of their relationship (the application) and the "currency" they exchange (the specific dignity type).II. The Authorities and the Transmission of RulesTo build a valid rule matrix, we must first characterize the "API documentation" provided by the primary authorities. The software logic must respect the distinct definitions of "Reception" (Latin: receptio; Arabic: qubūl) provided by these authors, as they differ in complexity and prerequisite conditions.2.1. Abu Ma’shar and the Arabic FoundationAbu Ma’shar, writing in the 9th century, synthesizes the earlier Persian and Hellenistic traditions. His Great Introduction to Astrology provides the physics engine for reception. For Abu Ma’shar, reception is tied intimately to the concept of "pushing nature" or "pushing power." When a planet applies to another, it pushes its significations onto that planet. If the receiving planet (the host) has dignity in the location of the pushing planet (the guest), the host "accepts" or "receives" this nature and manages it effectively.Key Insight for Software: Abu Ma’shar introduces the concept that reception can occur by degree (strong) or by sign (weak/latent). This validates the modern/Lilly concept of "generosity" (mutual reception without aspect) as a valid background state, even if it does not perfect an event in horary astrology.2.2. Guido Bonatti: The Strict ConstructionistBonatti’s Liber Astronomiae (13th century) is the definitive manual for the "Strict Mode" of the proposed software. Bonatti is highly legalistic. He explicitly defines reception as requiring an aspect. Furthermore, he imposes the "Two Lesser Dignities" constraint, a critical filter often ignored in modern software. For Bonatti, a planet receiving another merely by Term or Face is insufficient to establish a binding contract unless combined (e.g., Term + Face).Key Insight for Software: Bonatti provides the logic for "Mitigation." He explicitly details how reception cancels the malice of a square aspect or the weakness of a planet in fall.2.3. William Lilly: The Pragmatic SimplificationWriting in 1647, Lilly’s Christian Astrology represents a "back to Ptolemy" movement that paradoxically simplified many medieval rules. Lilly adopts the Ptolemaic tables for Triplicity and Terms (discarding the Dorothean/Egyptian tables used by Bonatti). He also relaxes the "Two Lesser Dignities" rule, often counting reception by Term alone as valid, albeit weak. Lilly is more likely to consider mutual reception by sign (without aspect) as a mitigating factor in nativities, though he still prefers aspects for horary perfection.Key Insight for Software: Lilly’s logic allows for "Mixed Receptions" (e.g., one planet in Domicile, the other in Term) to be counted more liberally than Bonatti, creating a "fuzzier" logic beneficial for psychological or character analysis but perhaps less rigorous for prediction.III. The Ontological Primitives: Defining Dignity and StandingBefore algorithmic logic can be applied to the interaction between planets, the static data structures—the tables of dignity—must be defined. The divergence in source texts regarding these tables is a primary source of error in modern astrological computation. A robust software solution must support polymorphic dignity tables.3.1. Defining Reception vs. Mutual ReceptionReception (Unilateral):Reception is a unilateral condition where Planet A (the Guest) is located in a zodiacal degree where Planet B (the Host) holds essential dignity.The Mechanism: Planet A "pushes" its nature and responsibility to Planet B. Planet B, holding authority (dignity) in that sector, "receives" Planet A.Authority: Bonatti defines this as "if a planet is joined with the lord of the sign in which it is or the lord of the exaltation... or with the lord of the [term] or triplicity or face".Mutual Reception (Bilateral):Mutual Reception is a bilateral condition where Planet A is in a dignity of Planet B, and Planet B is in a dignity of Planet A.The Mechanism: A closed-loop feedback system. Both planets act as host and guest. This allows for a "mutual exchange" of resources, often described as the planets swapping places to escape debility or gain advantage.Authority: Lilly defines this as "when two planets... are in each other's dignity; as Sun in Aries, and Mars in Leo". Note that Lilly accepts mixed dignities here (e.g., Sun in Aries, Mars in Leo—wait, Sun is Exalted in Aries, so this is Domicile/Exaltation mixed reception).3.2. The Dignity Basis: Data StructuresThe software must define five levels of dignity. The "Scheme" selected (Dorothean vs. Ptolemaic) alters the boolean availability of reception.A) Domicile (Rulership)The mapping of planets to signs is consistent across all authors. This is the strongest form of dignity (Score: 5). It represents total ownership and responsibility.Table: Mars (Ari, Sco), Venus (Tau, Lib), Mercury (Gem, Vir), Moon (Can), Sun (Leo), Jupiter (Sag, Pis), Saturn (Cap, Aqu).B) ExaltationConsistent across authors. This is the second strongest dignity (Score: 4). It represents high honor, energy, and value, though perhaps less stability than Domicile.Table: Sun (19° Ari), Moon (3° Tau), N. Node (3° Gem), Jupiter (15° Can), Mercury (15° Vir), Saturn (21° Lib), Mars (28° Cap), Venus (27° Pis).Logic: Reception by Exaltation is considered "Perfect" by Bonatti.C) Triplicity (The Great Divergence)This is a critical branching point. Triplicity represents "allies" or "kinship."Score: 3 points.Software Requirement: The user must select Dorothean (Bonatti) or Ptolemaic (Lilly).Table 1: Dorothean Triplicity (Bonatti Mode)
Used for Strict Medieval Logic. Note the 3 rulers. TriplicityDay RulerNight RulerParticipating RulerFireSunJupiterSaturnEarthVenusMoonMarsAirSaturnMercuryJupiterWaterVenusMarsMoonTable 2: Ptolemaic Triplicity (Lilly Mode)
Used for Renaissance Logic. Note the lack of participating rulers and Mars' dominance in Water. TriplicityDay RulerNight RulerParticipatingFireSunJupiter(None)EarthVenusMoon(None)AirSaturnMercury(None)WaterMarsMars(None)Implication: In Bonatti mode, a planet in a Water sign can be received by the Moon (Participating). In Lilly mode, the Moon has no Triplicity authority in Water, only Domicile (Cancer) or Face. This significantly reduces the frequency of valid receptions in Lilly's system.D) Term / Bound (The Boundary Divergence)The Terms (termini) are unequal divisions of signs. This creates the highest variance in reception calculation.Score: 2 points.Bonatti Mode: Uses Egyptian Terms.Lilly Mode: Uses Ptolemaic Terms.Table 3: Comparison of Term Distributions (Sample)
Data derived from SignDegreesEgyptian Ruler (Bonatti)Ptolemaic Ruler (Lilly)Aries0-6JupiterJupiter6-12 (Egy) / 6-14 (Ptol)VenusVenus12-20 (Egy) / 14-21 (Ptol)MercuryMercury20-25 (Egy) / 21-26 (Ptol)MarsMars25-30 (Egy) / 26-30 (Ptol)SaturnSaturnScorpio0-7 (Egy) / 0-6 (Ptol)Mars (0-6)Mars (0-6).........Software Logic: If a Planet is at 20° Aries:In Bonatti Mode (Egyptian): It is in the Term of Mars (20-25).In Lilly Mode (Ptolemaic): It is in the Term of Mercury (14-21).Result: This planet is received by Mars in Bonatti's system, but by Mercury in Lilly's. This fundamentally alters the judgment of the chart.E) Face / DecanConsistent across authors (Chaldean Order).Score: 1 point.Sequence: 10-degree segments ruled by planets in descending order of speed (Saturn -> Jupiter -> Mars -> Sun -> Venus -> Mercury -> Moon), repeating from 0° Aries.Logic: Valid for reception in Lilly. Valid only with support in Bonatti.IV. The Rule Matrix: Evaluating ReceptionThe evaluation of reception is not a simple boolean lookup. It involves conditional logic based on the strength of the dignity involved.4.1. Unilateral Reception Logic (A receives B)Input: Planet A (Promittor/Host), Planet B (Significator/Guest).Check: Is B in a dignity of A?Matrix 1: Reception Validity by AuthorCondition (B is in A's...)Bonatti (Strict) Lilly (Standard) DomicileValid (Perfect)Valid (Strong)ExaltationValid (Perfect)Valid (Strong)Triplicity (Alone)Invalid / Weak (Needs Term or Face)Valid (Moderate)Term (Alone)Invalid / Weak (Needs Trip or Face)Valid (Weak)Face (Alone)Invalid (Unless supported)Valid (Very Weak)Triplicity + TermValidValid (Strong)Triplicity + FaceValidValid (Moderate)Algorithm Note: The "Two Lesser Dignities" rule is specific to Bonatti/Medieval logic. If coding "Strict Mode," the software must return FALSE for reception if Planet B is only in the Term of Planet A. In "Lilly Mode," this returns TRUE.4.2. Mutual Reception LogicMutual reception acts as a multiplier of strength.Matrix 2: Mutual Reception TypesTypeConfigurationStrength (0-10)NotesPure DomicileA in B's House / B in A's House10 (Max)"The strongest and best of all" (Lilly).Pure ExaltationA in B's Exalt / B in A's Exalt9Highly energetic, "honored guest."Mixed MajorA in B's House / B in A's Exalt8Very strong. Common in practice.Mixed Major/MinorA in B's House / B in A's Term6Valid. Provides unilateral support + minor return.Mixed MinorA in B's Term / B in A's Face3Valid in Lilly; Invalid in Bonatti unless doubled.Mixed Reception Rule: Mixed reception does count. Lilly explicitly states: "It may be by triplicity, term, or face, or any essential dignity". However, the "strength" of the assistance provided is proportional to the dignity exchanged. A planet receiving via Domicile gives "House" resources; a planet receiving via Face gives only "Entryway" resources.V. The Aspect Requirement: Connectivity and PerfectionDoes reception exist without an aspect? This is the most significant divergence between "static" analysis (Natal) and "dynamic" analysis (Horary/Electional).5.1. The Aspect Requirement (Strict/Operative)For a reception to have an operative mitigating effect (i.e., to perfect a specific event, save a quesited matter from prohibition, or physically intervene), an applying aspect is required.Bonatti: "Reception happens when the receiver... aspects it". "If a planet is joined... by aspect".Lilly: In horary judgment, he almost always looks for the aspect to time the event.Logic: The aspect provides the "path" or "optical ray" along which the resource (dignity) is transferred. Without the aspect, the resource exists but cannot be delivered.5.2. Generosity (Passive/Latent)If there is Mutual Reception by Domicile but no aspect (e.g., planets in aversion, such as Aries and Scorpio), medieval authors like Ibn Ezra call this "Generosity" rather than Reception.Software Logic: In "Natal Mode," this can be scored as a latent psychological support (the planets "like" each other). In "Horary/Prediction Mode," this must return FALSE for perfection of the event. The software should label this state Generosity_No_Aspect.5.3. Allowed Aspects and OrbsAspects: Conjunction, Sextile, Square, Trine, Opposition.Orbs: Use the Moiety System.Formula: (Orb_A / 2) + (Orb_B / 2).Example: Sun (15° orb) and Mars (7° orb). Moiety sum = 7.5 + 3.5 = 11°. Any aspect within 11° is valid for reception.Sign Boundaries: Valid reception requires the aspect to be in-sign (Platic).Rule: If Planet A is at 29° Aries and Planet B is at 1° Leo, the square aspect is formed by degree, but the signs (Aries/Leo) are in Trine relation. In medieval rules, the Sign relationship usually dominates reception logic. A planet at 29° Aries is in the Term of Saturn (Egyptian). If Saturn is at 1° Leo, it is in a sign that trines Aries. However, technically 29° Ari to 1° Leo is a square aspect.Software Constraint: For reception, match the Sign relationship first. However, modern implementations of traditional rules often allow out-of-sign aspects if within moiety orbs. The strict medieval rule emphasizes the Sign boundary.VI. Strength Hierarchy and Mitigation EffectsThis section formalizes how reception modifies the outcome of the algorithm. Reception is a "Save Roll" in the astrological mechanic.6.1. Hierarchy of StrengthDomicile: Saves from death/destruction. Grants full perfection.Exaltation: Saves from harm. Grants perfection with glory/suddenness.Triplicity: Mitigates harm; grants assistance from "friends" or "allies."Term: Minor mitigation. Sets limits/bounds.Face: Minimal effect. Prevents being "Peregrine" (homeless).6.2. Operational Mitigation Rules (The "If/Then" Logic)Rule A: The "Saving" of Debility (Detriment/Fall)Scenario: Planet A is in Detriment or Fall.Effect: Normally, A fails to perform.Modification: If A applies to Planet B (its Lord/Host) with Reception.Outcome: Planet B "receives" A. B takes responsibility for A's affair. The matter perfects, though A contributes nothing. B does the work.Source: Bonatti.Rule B: Mitigation of Maleficence (Mars/Saturn)Scenario: Planet A applies to Saturn (Malefic).Effect: Normally, Saturn prohibits or destroys the matter (unless Saturn is significator).Modification: If Saturn receives A (e.g., A is in Capricorn).Outcome: The malice is removed. Saturn acts constructively. "The querent will be safe".Logic: Reception turns a Malefic into a functional agent for the specific context.Rule C: Perfection via Hard Aspect (Square/Opposition)Scenario: Aspect is Square or Opposition.Effect: Normally, this denies the event or brings it with severe conflict/litigation.Modification: Mutual Reception exists.Outcome: The planets "reconcile." The event perfects. "They will be reconciled, but first they will have one little combat at law" (Lilly).Software Output: Result = Success_With_Conflict.Rule D: Combustion Mitigation (The Chariot)Scenario: Planet A is Combust (0° to 8.5° from Sun).Effect: Planet A is destroyed/invisible.Modification: Planet A is in the Sun's Domicile (Leo) or Exaltation (Aries) and conjunct the Sun.Outcome: This is a special reception called "In the Chariot." The planet is protected by the King. It becomes empowered rather than destroyed.Source: Bonatti.Rule E: Retrograde MitigationScenario: The Receiver (Host) is Retrograde.Effect: The Host accepts the guest, but is essentially "sick" or "moving backward."Outcome: The matter perfects, but is subsequently regretted, overturned, or fails to hold.Source: Bonatti.Software Output: Result = Success_Followed_By_Failure.VII. Implementation-Ready Scoring ModelTo operationalize this for software, we propose a two-tier output: a "Weighted Score" (Engineering Abstraction) and a "Textual Judgment" (Strict Mode).7.1. Engineering Abstraction (Weighted Score)This allows for sorting disparate chart factors.Base Dignity Points (The Resource):Domicile: 5Exaltation: 4Triplicity: 3Term: 2Face: 1Reception Multipliers (The Transaction):Mutual Reception: x2.0 (Bilateral leverage).Applying Aspect (Soft): x1.5 (Efficient transfer).Applying Aspect (Hard): x1.0 (Transfer with cost - reception neutralizes the negative penalty of squares).No Aspect: x0.5 (Latent potential only).Formula:Score = (Dignity_Value_A_in_B + Dignity_Value_B_in_A) * Aspect_Multiplier7.2. Strict Textual Mode (Categorical)This mimics the judgment of a medieval astrologer.Category 1: Perfect Mutual Reception. (Mutual Major Dignities + Applying Aspect). Output: "Excellent Success."Category 2: Perfect Single Reception. (Applies to Domicile/Exalt Lord). Output: "Success via Assistance."Category 3: Mitigated Hard Aspect. (Square/Opp + Mutual Reception). Output: "Success after Conflict."Category 4: Weak Reception. (Term/Face + Aspect). Output: "Minor Assistance / Insufficient for Perfection."Category 5: Void Reception. (No Aspect OR Single minor dignity in Bonatti mode). Output: "No Reception."VIII. Examples: Unit Test CasesThe following concrete examples serve as unit tests for the ruleset.Scenario 1: Mutual Reception by DomicileData: Sun at 10° Aries (Exaltation of Sun... wait. Sun in Aries is exalted, but ruled by Mars. Mars in Leo is ruled by Sun).Correction: Sun at 10° Aries (Mars Rule). Mars at 5° Leo (Sun Rule).Aspect: Applying Trine.Bonatti: Valid Perfect Reception.Lilly: Valid Strongest Reception.Outcome: Easy perfection.Scenario 2: Mutual Reception by ExaltationData: Mars at 15° Cancer (Fall). Jupiter at 20° Capricorn (Fall).Dignity: Mars is in Jupiter's Exaltation. Jupiter is in Mars' Exaltation.Aspect: Opposition.Analysis: Both planets are in Fall (Debilitated). However, they are in Mutual Reception by Exaltation.Outcome: They lift each other out of the mud. The Opposition normally prevents success, but the MR permits it.Note: Lilly calls this "Counteraction." It mitigates the Fall.Scenario 3: Mixed Reception (Domicile / Term)Data: Venus at 4° Taurus (Own Domicile). Mars at 20° Libra (Venus Domicile).Wait, this is not mutual.Correct Setup: Moon at 10° Sagittarius. Jupiter at 15° Taurus.Dignity Check: Moon is in Jupiter's Domicile. Jupiter is in Taurus (Moon's Exaltation).Aspect: Trine (out of sign? No, Sag/Tau are inconjunct). Let's adjust for aspect.Setup: Moon at 2° Leo. Sun at 15° Taurus.Moon is in Sun's Domicile. Sun is in Taurus (Moon's Exaltation).Aspect: Applying Square.Outcome: Valid Mixed Mutual Reception. The square causes friction, but the reception (Domicile/Exaltation) perfects the matter.Scenario 4: Reception with No AspectData: Mercury at 5° Gemini. Jupiter at 5° Virgo.State: Mercury in Domicile. Jupiter in Mercury's Domicile.Aspect: Square. (Wait, this has an aspect).Setup: Sun at 1° Aries. Mars at 1° Scorpio.Sun in Mars Domicile. Mars in Mars Domicile. (Not mutual).Setup: Sun at 1° Aries. Mars at 1° Leo.Sun in Mars Domicile. Mars in Sun Domicile.Aspect: Trine.Setup for No Aspect: Sun at 1° Aries. Mars at 1° Virgo.Sun in Mars Domicile. Mars in Mercury Domicile. (No).Correct No Aspect Setup: Planet A in Aries (Mars rule). Planet B in Scorpio (Mars rule). Not mutual.Mutual No Aspect: Venus in Aries (Mars Domicile). Mars in Taurus (Venus Domicile).Aspect: Signs are adjacent (Aversion). No aspect.Judgment:Bonatti: Void. No reception occurs because rays do not mix.Lilly/Modern: "Generosity" exists. Psychological affinity, but no event perfection.Scenario 5: Applying vs. SeparatingData: Moon at 12° Aries. Mars at 15° Leo.State: Moon applies to Mars (Trine). Moon in Mars Domicile.Judgment: Valid Reception. Active.Variation: Moon at 18° Aries. Mars at 15° Leo.State: Moon separating.Judgment: The reception was active but the opportunity has passed.Scenario 6: Edge Case - One Planet CombustData: Mercury at 15° Aries (Combust). Mars at 15° Leo.Aspect: Mercury applies Trine to Mars.State: Mercury is in Mars' Domicile. Mars receives Mercury.Analysis: Mercury is destroyed by the Sun. However, Mars receives Mercury. Mars is strong (in Leo, Triplicity ruler).Outcome: Mars can "save" Mercury or accomplish the task on Mercury's behalf, despite Mercury's weakness. The reception acts as a lifeline.Scenario 7: Bonatti's "Two Lesser Dignities" FailureData (Night Chart): Moon at 10° Aquarius. Saturn at 15° Aries.Aspect: Sextile.Check: Saturn in Aries (Moon is... nothing).Check: Moon in Aquarius. Saturn is Domicile lord. Valid Reception (Moon received by Saturn).Failure Construction: Planet A in Term of B (only).Data: Sun at 22° Aries (Ptolemaic Term of Mars). Mars at 15° Gemini.Aspect: Sextile.Check: Sun in Term of Mars. Is Sun in Mars Triplicity? (Day chart: Sun is ruler. Night chart: Jupiter). Is Sun in Mars Face? (20-30 Aries is Venus).Result: Sun is only in Mars' Term.Judgment (Bonatti): Invalid. Reception by Term alone is insufficient.Judgment (Lilly): Valid (Weak).Scenario 8: Retrograde ReceiverData: Moon at 10° Taurus. Venus at 15° Capricorn (Retrograde).Aspect: Moon applies Trine to Venus.State: Moon in Venus Domicile. Venus receives Moon.Condition: Venus is Retrograde.Outcome (Bonatti): The matter perfects because of reception, but "it is ruined" later because the receiver acts contrarily (backing out).IX. Compact Ruleset Summary (Code Specification)9.1. Data Tables (Configuration)Config: Dignity_Schema (Enum: DOROTHEAN, PTOLEMAIC)Config: Term_Schema (Enum: EGYPTIAN, PTOLEMAIC)Config: Reception_Mode (Enum: STRICT_BONATTI, STANDARD_LILLY)9.2. Boolean RulesRule 1: IS_RECEIVED(Guest, Host)Code snippetDetermine Dignities of Host at Guest.Position:
  List D =

IF Reception_Mode == STANDARD_LILLY:
  RETURN (Count(D) > 0)

IF Reception_Mode == STRICT_BONATTI:
  IF (Domicile IN D) OR (Exaltation IN D):
    RETURN TRUE
  IF (Triplicity IN D) AND ((Term IN D) OR (Face IN D)):
    RETURN TRUE
  IF (Term IN D) AND (Face IN D):
    RETURN TRUE
  RETURN FALSE (Single lesser dignity insufficient)
Rule 2: IS_OPERATIVE_RECEPTION(Guest, Host)Code snippetBoolean Static_Reception = IS_RECEIVED(Guest, Host)
Boolean Aspect_Valid = HAS_APPLYING_ASPECT(Guest, Host, Orb=Moiety)

IF Static_Reception AND Aspect_Valid:
  RETURN TRUE
ELSE:
  RETURN FALSE
Rule 3: CHECK_MITIGATION(Debilitated_Planet, Host)Code snippetIF IS_OPERATIVE_RECEPTION(Debilitated_Planet, Host):
  IF Host.IsEssentialyDignified:
    RETURN "FULL_MITIGATION"
  ELSE:
    RETURN "PARTIAL_MITIGATION"
ELSE:
  RETURN "NO_MITIGATION"
This framework translates the nuances of medieval reception into a rigorous, configurable logic structure suitable for modern astrological software engines. It respects the historical divergence between Bonatti and Lilly while providing a clear path for deterministic evaluation.